SPEAKER 0
In this lecture, we'll be looking at some of the various coding practises you can employ in order to create high performance code. From the earlier lecture on architecture, we learn about various features of modern CPUs that can be exploited to increase throughput. Each in their own way, these features are associated with trying to keep the compute hardware working on as many instructions and pieces of data as possible at all times. In terms of maximising throughput at least, the idea is to have everything working at once and nothing sitting idle. We looked at features such as pipelining and super scalarity, instruction level parallelism techniques that keep the core working on multiple instructions at the same time. We looked at cache, the relatively small amount of high speed memory the CPU core has access to, and how that can be exploited to minimise the number of requests to main memory RAM you'll need to make. Which is an important concept because memory bandwidth will probably be the main limitation when writing high performance code. We looked at SIMD. Single instruction multiple data, whereby special instructions can be leveraged which allow you to process multiple blocks of data at the same time. Then we looked at multi-core and multi-threading, MIMDI, multiple instruction, multiple data techniques that allowed the computation to be split up amongst multiple CPU cores, either on the same die or on the same motherboard or perhaps an entirely different node connected through high-speed interconnects. I've organised these different techniques on this slide in this particular order, ranked very roughly in order of how much direct control you have over these features as a programmer, particularly as a higher level programmer. On one end, we've got things like multi-threading, which you have quite a bit of control of as a software developer. You'll be launching and managing your threads and software and they'll be managed by the operating system. Then you've got stuff like CIMD and cache-based features which are relatively low level concerns, pretty close to the hardware level. But you still have at least some level of control as a software developer, either directly in the C code you write or with the help of the compiler. Then if you go deeper down to things like pipelining and super scalarity, this is handled by the CPU in hardware, so you don't have direct control over it per se. But you can still write code which is optimised to take advantage of those features even if you can't directly control them. Cache is a bit in the middle in that cache is almost entirely hardware managed, but you still need to think about it quite a lot as a software developer. Writing high performance code is really a team effort, like a relay, where you do your best to write optimised higher level C code, the compiler takes it from there to make optimised machine code, and then the hardware itself might optimise that even further, using pipelining, super scalarity, speculative execution, out of order execution, or any of the other tricks it has up its sleeve. When you're optimising your code, there will sometimes be a trade-off between memory bandwidth and or size and computational complexity. You might be able to save instructions by storing results of earlier calculations. But maybe it won't be worth storing the results because it'll cost you too much memory bandwidth storing and retrieving them. So you might just be better off recalculating them every time. And perhaps those unnecessary rewrites to memory will be pushing more important things out of your cache. But as a general rule, focus your attention more on memory rather than compute. So shaving off 1 or 2 instructions at the cost of 1 or 2 extra memory read-writes. Those memory rewrites are probably gonna be a lot more expensive. So touch memory as little as possible because the CPU can process instructions much faster than it can access RAM. As briefly introduced in the earlier lecture on architecture, throwing more and more computation cores at your problem isn't necessarily going to give you better performance if there's not a corresponding increase in memory bandwidth that comes along with it. So I gave the analogy last time that even a fairly modest CPU can churn through memory much, much faster than even high performance RAM can keep up with. So if you need to pull memory from RAM on every clock cycle of the CPU then the CPU's just gonna be sitting idle most of the time, it's gonna stall waiting for memory access. These here are the same numbers that I used in the earlier lecture, but just to reiterate. Let's take an 8 core CPU running at 3 gigahertz and we'll assume it's processing a single 256 bit block of memory using some SIMD instruction every cycle. That works out to be 715 gigabytes of memory bandwidth. And that's relatively conservative. Because some instructions like fused multiply add might read in 3 256 bit blocks of data and write out 1 256 bit block of data. And with features like super scalarity, the CPU might also be doing multiple instructions per clock cycle, so that 715 gigabytes per second could easily blow out to say 7 terabytes per second. Meanwhile, let's assume we've got some relatively high spec RAM. Well, it's only gonna be capable of a small fraction of that bandwidth. Because of that mismatch in memory bandwidth, if the CPU is spitting out bulk memory requests every single clock cycle, then the CPU is actually just gonna be sitting idle like 80, 90%, maybe even 99% of the time. And it's due to that mismatch that you're more likely to find yourself in that memory bound situation rather than the compute bound situation. Primarily focus on accessing memory less or in a smart way that exploits cache. And then secondarily focus on minimising your computational complexity by shaving off instructions. OK, so a good chunk of this lecture will just be me going through various common types of optimisation. So just listing off different types of optimisation, what they do, why you would use them, and then hopefully, ah, you memorising them and using them at some point in your, in your projects. The compiler itself supports flags which allow you to indicate how hard you want the compiler to work optimising the code and all the types of optimisations you want. And these flags will be compiler dependent. I'll be using the GCC optimisation flags as an example, but other C compilers have very similar options. First, there's the 00 flag. So this turns optimisation off. In this case, you're indicating not that you want the runtime to be optimised, but rather that you want the compile time to be optimised. For the relatively small programmes you'll be writing for this course, the compile time. Should be pretty trivial, but if you're compiling, say, a very large project, and that compile time could be minutes, even hours, so, if you're debugging and you just want to know if something works or not, then optimization's off could be the way to go. For us in this course, it can also be handy when you're trying to optimise your code to sometimes turn optimisations off. Because otherwise it can be a little bit tricky to work out exactly what's going on and what changes you made actually made a difference causes the compiler's always trying to optimise the way your bad bits of code anyway, so I'll talk about that more in a bit. The first true optimisation level, 01. Does as you might expect, it tries a bit to optimise the code but doesn't go all out. So it tries a bit but doesn't try that hard. It's a compromise between having code that runs fast versus code that compiles fast. 01 just looks for the most obvious optimisations. If you go to the link at the bottom of that slide, it goes into more detail about the kinds of optimisations that 01 enables. Then there's level 2 optimisation, so the mentality here is to employ most of the optimisations that don't trade space for speed. So that is sometimes there will be a trade-off between the size of your final compiled code and the speed at which it runs. Although often you won't have to make that trade-off, because often when you make your code smaller it also gets faster, but not always. So 02 employs opttimisations where there is no size speed trade-off. The code will be smaller and also faster, or at least it should be. Next level up, level 3 has all the optimisation of level 2, plus some additional opttimisations. And perhaps one of the more important ones is it enables vectorization, so that is, it'll try to employ SIMD instructions. Although I've typically found that automatic vectorization of the compiler isn't always that great. Which is where things like AVX intrinsics can be useful, and with AVX intrinsics you essentially tell the compiler manually what instructions to use, and we'll talk about those more in a in a later lecture. There's also optimations like OFSt that deploy all the optimisation of level 3, but also loosen the requirements on how accurate the results have to be. So reciprocal square root is a good example. That's something that can be relatively slow to calculate at full IEEE compliant precision. But you can get a pretty good answer more quickly if you can tolerate a bit more error in the answer, which in many applications is completely fine. Regardless of which compiler you're using, there will be similar optimisation levels available, but the details will vary. Some will even have additional options like the Intel compiler for example, lets you optimise for specific generations of Intel CPUs. The first one we'll look at is mathematical precision. So let's say I want to calculate the sign of some variable X. I've chosen the sine function but it doesn't really matter what the function is. But imagine it's some common mathematical function like sign, cos, a 12, square root, exponential, etc. etc. A common mathematical function that might be a bit computationally intensive to calculate compared to simple operations like add, subtract, multiply, etc. But it's also a very basic and common mathematical function, so you might be calling it a lot. And any speed up of that particular function could really improve the speed of your programme as a whole. The first question to ask yourself is what numerical precision do I really need for this operation? Do I need double precision, so that is float 64, or would single precision float 32 be fine? If you can get away with using the lower precision version, you might get a speed up in terms of the function itself, requiring less instructions to calculate the required precision. But you'll also get a memory bandwidth benefit, cause when you go from loading a float 64, that's 8 bytes, to a float 32, that's 4 bytes, so you've halved the memory requirement. It also means that when you're employing CIMD instructions, you'll be able to process blocks of say 8 instead of 4. I'm using the example of floating point numbers here, but there's similar considerations when you're working with integers, although the precision of those is obviously always one. For integers it's more like a question of what kind of range do you need? Do you need to go from just 0 to 255 or 0 to 65,535? Do you need negative numbers, you know, etc. etc. There's even the option of going half precision in some instances. GPU support for float 16, so half precision, has improved in recent years. CPU support's still a little patchy, but that's another option. Here we're talking about calculating the result with the full precision specified by the data format. So the result we get is accurate to within the full number of bits that float 64, 32, or 16 IEEE 754 floating point numbers supports. It's like the binary equivalent of when you write out a number in decimal digits and every decimal place is meaningful, except maybe for some rounding in the last digit. But often An approximation of the function is completely fine. So imagine for example you're processing real world measured data. That data's got a bunch of noise over the top of it anyway, so the data itself isn't accurate to within IEEE 754 standard anyway. So spending a lot of time trying to calculate the sign function to the full 32 bit precision when your input data is effectively only 16 bits is kind of pointless. But even if you're just doing purely theoretical simulations and calculations, you don't always need the result to be full precision of the data format you're using. That brings us to the world of fast math and approximations. You can actually set the floating point model using compiler flags. So in GCC we saw the O fast flag. In the Microsoft compiler it's slash FP fast. Intel, it's minus FP minus model equals fast. OK, let's look at the different ways we could implement a fast version of a function like sign. Here's a terrible approximation of sign that is incredibly fast. No matter what the argument X is, just always put out 0. And much like a broken clock is exactly correct every 12 hours, this so-called function will also be correct every pi. Probably not a really appropriate approximation, it really just means you don't need the sign term in your formula at all, really. But it is fast. Another approximation would be to approximate sinx as just X. That's also very fast, and even though it might seem like a bit of a silly approximation, that one actually does come up more often than you might think. It's called the small angle approximation. If you look at the graph here, we can see that sin x equals 10 x equals X holds up pretty well when we're talking about very small angles. So for example, I work in optics, and if you imagine something like a laser beam that's travelling almost exclusively in a straight line, about 0 degrees, plus or minus a little bit of spreading out of the beam, that small angle works pretty good. A similar sort of idea is you take the Taylor expansion of the function you're interested in around the region you want to use your function. So in the previous slide where sin x equals X, we just had one term. But you could keep adding more and more terms to build up a polynomial approximation of your function in some region. And it could be quite accurate, at least within some narrow region of values of X. Another option is to look for so-called fast math versions of the functions you're after. Now this could be a special function from a library you're using, so that is some special implementation optimised for speed at the expense of some accuracy. Often those functions will start off with an F at the front of the name or the word fast at the front of the name to differentiate them from the full precision versions. And there are also some fast math functions implemented in hardware on CPUs and GPUs. So for example, GPUs have fast trigonometry functions. Like Sine cos because rotations are so important for graphics, X86 CPUs have fast reciprocal square root and reciprocals that are about a factor of 5 faster than the fully IEEE compliant alternatives. On the GPU, those fast trigonometry functions like sine cos are also very handy when you're working with complex numbers. And then of course you can implement the function properly to be fully compliant at the expense of speed. The next type of optimisation is to keep an eye out for what calculations you can do at the same time. For example, instead of calling sine and then cos as two separate calls, perhaps because the two are so similar and you'll often need both of them together, you can make a function which gives you both at the same time. This can give you the benefit of less instructions, but it also can mean less memory bandwidth because instead of reading in X twice, this potentially gives you the benefit of less instructions, but it also can mean less memory bandwidth. Because instead of reading in X and then writing out the answer and then reading in X again and writing out the answer again, you just read in X once and write out two numbers once. Combined sine cos is a common example cause you often need sine and cos together for things like rotations or complex numbers and arithmetic. But if you're writing your own functions, rather than say running function A and then function B, see if you can combine those two together to a single function AB. Particularly if it means you only have to read in or write out memory once instead of twice. There's a potential to save instructions by integrating functions together, but as we mentioned earlier, often you'll be memory bandwidth limited, and probably the biggest saving you'll get is actually not having to go back and forth from memory multiple times. Next optimisation, remove loop invariant code, so that is, if something doesn't change inside the loop, don't calculate it inside the loop, just calculate it once before the loop starts and reuse it inside the loop. In this example you've got this multiply accumulate operation, AI equals BI plus C times D. We're multiplying C times D, adding it to B and then storing the result in A. Meanwhile, on the next line. Why is this E equals G index K line even here? So K doesn't change inside the loop. E isn't used inside the loop, so ostensibly we'll be calculating E equals GK. End times When we really only need to calculate it once, before or after the loop is finished, so it doesn't even belong in the loop. So we evict it from the loop and run it after the loop's finished. Similarly That multiply accumulate operation has that C times D term in it. Which is just a constant that doesn't change through the loop. But we don't need to be calculating C times D N times, we just need to calculate it once. So we do, we calculate it once before the loop starts and then reuse it through the loop, potentially saving N minus 1 unnecessary calculations. Now for something simple and obvious like C times D, the compiler would hopefully pick up on the fact that C times D shouldn't be in the loop and optimise that for you. And C times D is a pretty simple calculation, but of course, you know, we could be talking about something which is much more computationally intensive than just multiply. Like what if that temp variable was the result of solving a partial differential equation or something, so a call to some external library that's quite intense. It could potentially be very slow, especially if it's an external function, the compiler won't necessarily be able to tell whether this thing is just a constant or whether it's gonna be changing every iteration, it won't necessarily be able to tell that. Next optimisation, so exit loops earlier when possible. Don't keep going if you've already found the answer, for example. And this is the kind of thing that could come up if you're, say, looking for a certain value in an array. Then once you've found it, don't keep iterating, just exit the loop. In this example we've got some complicated function, complex funct, which looks at each element in A and if it's below some threshold it triggers a flag. That potentially computationally intense function complex_fk in this current piece of code would run n times no matter what. But once that flag's triggered, that's it, there's no point to continue calling that a function because it wouldn't change the outcome. Once flag is set to 1, it can never be set to any other value in that loop, so the search is complete, so you should just exit. If that flag was set on say iteration 0, then it's going to do the full N minus 1 unnecessary calls to the function. Instead, put in some kind of mechanism to allow the loop to exit early. You could throw in a return line. Alternatively, you could have some flag which is integrated into the conditional of the loop. So now keep looping is set to zero, the loop will terminate. That's a silly way to do it in this specific scenario because keep looping is always equal to the opposite of flag in this case. So I didn't really need to create an additional variable in this case. I could have just used not flag, but in some other scenarios you might actually need to create a variable like this to keep track of when the loop terminates. It's just kind of a weird way of doing it in this specific scenario. This is the same basic idea but written in a way which is even more compressed. So while I is less than N minus 1 and complex_funct is greater than or equal to the threshold, so that complex funct greater than equal to the threshold is the opposite scenario that was in the if statement before. That'll just keep looping until I equals or exceeds N or if the complex function is less than the threshold, in which case it'll exit. And then for the flag we can just check whether I reached the end or not. If it reached the end, that means the function never triggered. Or if it didn't reach the end, that means it did trigger. Next optimisation strategy. Use a lookup table. So don't recalculate the same thing over and over again, just calculate it once, store the answer, and then reuse it. For example, here we've got a loop that's calling tan a lot, and those repeated tan calls are killing our throughput. However, let's say, maybe you only need to calculate 10 at a relatively small number of well-defined angles. You don't need to be able to calculate 10 for arbitrary angles. Let's say you only need to calculate 10 at M different angles. Angle I there can only have M possible values where M is a relatively small number. Or perhaps angle I can have any value, but you just don't really care about the precision that much, like we have with the fast math examples from before. So maybe dividing up the full rotations of two pi into M unique angles is plenty accurate enough for what you need. Either way, either because the angle can only have a relatively small number of angles or because we don't really care about the precision of the angles that much, we can just pre-calculate 10 at all the angles we care about. Then inside the loop, we take the angle, map it onto the closest one of those pre-defined angles, and then use the lookup table. In this example, let's say angle I can be between minus pi and pi. We take angle I, add pi to it, so now it's a number between 0 and 2 pi, then we divide by 2 pi, so now we've got a number between 0 and 1, and then we multiply it by the number of values in our lookup table M. Now the index of our lookup table will be a value between 0 and M minus 1, although you have to be careful of the bounds and the rounding there. We look up that index of the lookup table, and now we have our tan value without having to actually evaluate the tan function n times, or 2n in this case. If that tan lookup table is relatively small and you're using it a lot, it could also end up just being stored in relatively low level cache, and then you shouldn't have any memory bandwidth issues. For example, if the size of the lookup table M is 256, then the whole lookup table is only 1 kilobyte, and that should fit in cache, no problem. But if you decide to be a wise guy and pre-calculate 2 billion different values of tan, Then that lookup table would be gigabytes, and you'll lose a lot of the benefits of the look-up table in the first place, because of the memory bandwidth issues. So make the lookup table as big as it needs to be, but no bigger. Next optimisation, copy propagation. We've got Y equals X and then Z equals 3 + Y. Rather than set Y to X and then set Z to 3 + Y, we could just collapse that down into a single Z equals 3 + X. That's a pretty trivial one really. Next optimisation, dead code removal or orphaned code removal. If a calculation isn't being used anywhere, then why are we calculating it? That's a good question. In this code fragment we can see that whilst I is used for something, it's printed out at least, K doesn't get used anywhere. It gets declared, it gets incremented by 2. But then there's no references to K after that. Presumably K had a purpose at some point, otherwise I don't know why it would be there. But it's quite common when you're debugging or adding and removing features during programming that some parts of your code will become orphaned, you're left to just pointlessly calculate things that no one will ever use. So in this case, K is like these random cakes in the background of Doctor Strangelove. In Doctor Strangelove, the original script had them having a big pie fight, a big cake fight at the end of the movie. Um, but that got edited out, so now through the movie, there's just these random cakes in the background that don't really seem to make any sense. Because the scene that used to use those cakes is not in the movie. So we remove all references to K as ultimately it's not gonna be used anywhere, and declaring it and calculating is a pointless exercise. So this is fairly basic code cleanup. This next optimisation could make things worse or it could make things better. Um, here we've got a variable X. I calculate a value for X. Then I use that value to calculate Q. Now I need to do a new calculation, A + B, which has nothing to do with the earlier calculation, so do I reuse the same variable X again? Well, it could be good to reuse the variable X, so that means I'm using less memory. Um, I don't have to allocate any more space for another variable. However, that could also limit my parallelism. So if I'm reusing X, that means I can't do the Y times Z and the A + B calculations in parallel. I have to wait for Q to be calculated before I can reuse X to calculate A + B. Whereas if I just declare a separate chunk of memory now, I can calculate Q and A plus B in parallel. And this is a pretty trivial case for an example, here we're just talking about the difference of a single 32 bit integer for example, but you can also imagine that maybe X isn't a single integer, maybe it's a big array of integers, and that potentially uses a lot of memory. Then there's more of a trade-off to consider. Can you afford to declare enough memory such that all of your end workers, or maybe they're end threads, Uh, maybe there's some other form of parallelism. Can you afford to declare enough memory that they can all have their own independent copies, or will they have to share the same memory and cop the potential slowdowns associated with having to synchronise and wait between threads and or wanting to use a common resource, which is memory in this case? Next, if you've got a common sub-expression that's common to multiple calculations, don't recalculate it each time, just reuse it. So in this case we're talking about the calculation Y + Z, which is used to calculate both W and V. So rather than recalculate each time, just calculate it once at the start and reuse that variable multiple times. Next, induction variable simplification. Here we've got a variable K. Which we find by calculating the loop index I times 4 plus some constant M. And that's the kind of calculation you might do if you're trying to get the 1D index of a 2D array, for example. So that is, if you imagine we're trying to calculate a memory address. Maybe M is the address of a certain column of the matrix, and then you're selecting the I row element of a 32 bit, i.e. 4 byte data type like in 32 or float 32. Whatever the exact scenario is, we're going through the loop and K is basically starting at K equals M and then it just keeps incrementing up by 4 every iteration of the loop. If we calculate K fully each loop, then we have to call this full multiply and add operation N times, so there's a multiply and add each iteration. However, you don't have to recalculate the whole statement every iteration, you can take advantage of the fact that the previous iterations have partially calculated the result for you already and just start from there. Start away from the previous iteration left off. In this example, it means just start K with the value of M and then increment it by a constant 4 every loop. Now we've reduced the complexity from a multiply and add per iteration to an increment by a constant each iteration. Next, strength reduction. Replace expensive calculations with a cheaper one that does the same thing in your specific case. For example, if you want to calculate X2. You could call the power function X 2, but that's really overkill for such a simple scenario, it's not wrong, it might just be unnecessarily slow. The power function is set up to deal with the general case, so fractional exponents, potentially very large exponents. It's set up to deal with just about anything, but we're working with the very simple scenario of just squaring something. And exponunciation is really just fancy multiplication. So instead of calling power with inputs of x and 2, You could just write Y equals X times X. You don't really need to get the power function involved. In a similar vein, multiplication is just fancy addition. If you have Y equals 2 times X, you could also write that as Y equals X + X. Replacing a multiplication with an addition, but is there even a speed difference between multiplication and addition? Is addition even faster than multiplication? Well, that question's actually a little bit nuanced, and we're getting down into the weeds here to be sure, but it depends on what architecture you're working with and whether you're talking about multiplying floating point or fixed point, that is integers. If you look at this example, I've taken the listed latency and throughput values for the SIMD, multiply, and addition instructions respectively. So V mull PS is the SIMD instruction that multiplies a set of 8 float 32s, and the add PS is the SIMD instruction that adds a set of 8 float 32s. Latency refers to how many cycles it takes to get a response, so that's like the length of the pipeline, and throughput refers to how many cycles each instruction takes. So you can get more than one instruction per cycle, meaning CPI is less than one, if you've got instruction level parallelism techniques like super scalarity for example, which will allow you to output multiple instructions per cycle. OK, so if we look here, we can see that the early Intel architectures prior to 2014, There was a difference in performance between multiplication and addition. Not necessarily a clear winner, so in Ivy Bridge, addition and multiplication have the same throughput, but the latency of multiplication is worse. In Haswell, multiplication has better throughput but worse latency. In Broadwell, multiplication has better throughput and latency is the same between addition and multiplication. Then with ice lake and sky lake, both addition and multiplication are the same in both latency and throughput. But all of this is for floating point float thirty-twos. What about integers? Well, that's actually a bit clearer, if we're working with integers, addition should indeed be faster than multiplication. For floats, it's not so clear which one's gonna win, addition versus multiplication, but for integers, addition should be the winner. But when it comes to multiplication versus division, multiplication is typically significantly faster, so if you can rewrite your calculation in terms of a multiplication rather than a division, It could get a decent speed up. So look here, we can see the latency of a float 32 division operation, ah, up to the sort of 10 to 20 range, whereas the multiplication latency is between 3 and 5. For the throughput, the throughput of the division is between 5 to 14 cycles per instruction, whereas multiplication is 0 to 1, so about 10 to 20 times more throughput. Worth noting here as well, to deal with the fact that full division is relatively slow, there's also fast math versions on the CPU, so there's an approximate reciprocal operation, and there's also an approximate reciprocal square root function. And they've got throughput and latency. That's much better than full precision division. But at the expense obviously of not being true for precision, it's an approximation. But it's maximum relative error is 1.5 times 10-12, so it's pretty accurate. It's just not full IEEE compliant. Next optimisation, inlining. Move what would otherwise be function calls directly into the lines of codes themselves, for example, here we've got a loop. In which the M add function is called repeatedly, it's a very minor subroutine, simply does a multiply, accumulate operation. Now because the routine is so tiny, just the overhead of calling it and returning the result could be a significant portion of the total runtime. So instead, we inline it. We move the guts of the function directly into the loop itself. Now there's no call to an external function, it's just directly inside the loop, which saves on some overhead associated with the function calls. And that could make it faster, but the trade-off here is, it could also make your code tedious and unreadable and unmaintainable. If you've got a bazillion of just cut and pastes of code from within functions directly into lines within loops, it's gonna be a mess. Another way around that is to declare it as a macro instead of a function, so that'll give you the same speed benefit, but maintain at least some level of readability in the code. When you use a define like this in C, when you define a macro like this. It's essentially like the pre-processor routine, so that's the routine that runs over your code before the compiler does its job. It's like the preprocessor just goes around and cut and pastes that macro everywhere it's been called for. So rather than you cutting and pasting it everywhere, which makes the code look like a complete mess, it's like an automated cut and paste that's been done by the, the preprocessor. The preprocessor goes over your source, modifies it based on things like defines and then hands it over to the compiler. It's doing that replacement you've defined automatically for you. Alternatively, you can also suggest to the compiler that it in lines the function. So this is kind of like the macro example except it's handled by the compiler itself rather than the preprocessor. So that's effectively 3 ways of doing something very similar. 1, cut and paste it yourself and make your code a complete mess. 2, get the preprocessor to cut and paste it for you using macros. 3, suggest to the compiler that it in lines this function for you at the compile stage. And I say suggest because it's not guaranteed that the compiler will do it. Next optimisation, loop unrolling. Let's say we've got a tight loop like so. So that is we've got a loop where the content of the loop is relatively simple. There's not a lot of calculations in that loop. And as a consequence, the overhead of the loop itself could represent a significant portion of the workload. So inside the loop we've got to multiply, accumulate. A equals A plus B times C. And that's not much different in terms of computational complexity than the I++ incrementing of the loop counter and the conditional I less than N of the loop check itself. So just maintaining the loop and the calculation inside the loop are both of sort of similar complexity. Unrolling the loop means we want to reorganise the loop in such a way that we do more work per iteration and less iterations overall. So we're trying to shift the balance back between the portion of time we spend doing useful work, and the time we spend just maintaining the loop itself. Instead of iterating over every value of I, you can unroll the loop, in this case by a factor of 4, and now we do 4 iterations at a time. We only do a quarter of the iterations, but we do 4 times the work in each iteration, meaning that that overhead of the loop itself has been reduced by a factor of 4. Of course, N, the total length of the array, Doesn't have to be a multiple of 4 or 8 or any other number we want unroll the loop by. It could be a prime number for all we know. So in that case, we'll have to deal with the special end case of the last few elements as a separate loop that deals with the remainders. However, if N is large, let's say N is a million, and you've unrolled the loop by a factor of 4, then those last iterations will be max 3. But you've saved 750,000 loop overhead calls. Next, move your conditional statements like if statements outside the loop rather than inside the loop where possible. So that way you'll only have to evaluate the conditional once rather than end times inside the loop. The example here we've got a loop, and inside that loop there's an if statement based on some variable which doesn't change inside the loop K. There's no reason to evaluate whether K equals 0 N times once for each iteration, cause it doesn't change inside the loop. So don't put it inside the loop, branch outside the loop, and now you only have to call it once. The need to lay out might also make the compiler's life easier, identifying optimisations. And here we've got a bonus optimisation as well, the loop is just setting the whole array to zero. That's a common step you'll often have to do after you allocate some memory, and you wanna initialise the value of the array. But for something like that, don't use a loop, just use memset, it's, it'll be significantly faster. However, an important note here is that memset writes values on a per byte basis, not a per element basis. So it's like a binary operation really in this case. It's writing the unsigned 8-bit integer value you specify, we specified 0, so that means it's writing blocks of 8 binary zeros. And writing that block of eight binary zeros for size of in brackets float times n bytes worth, so that would be 4 n bytes worth. It works fine for zero, because if you're in float 32, float 64, int 32, unsigned int 32, whatever it is, they all agree on what zero is in binary. You set all the bits to 0, that represents zero in all those different data types. But that's not true of other numbers, so if you tried to set the whole array of float thirty-twos to one, like this, It wouldn't work, it would just be gibberish, right, so just keep that in mind. All the data types happen to agree on what 0 is, they don't agree on how to represent, say, 1. They'll have completely different representations for 1. So just keep that in mind. Here's a similar idea about moving branching statements from inside the loop to outside the loop. However, in this case, the actual loop variables themselves are involved, so whereas before, we just had some constant K which didn't change inside the loop, in this case, the conditional statement is J less than I, where I and J are both loop variables in this 2D nested loop. They're not loop independent, they are loop variables, and hence we can't just move that statement outside of the loop entirely like we did before because the conditional statement does depend on the loop variables. However, we can still trim the fat a bit by moving that conditional j less than i from being a branch inside the loop to instead being part of the loop conditional statement itself. Rather than the J loop being a single loop that's running from zero to N, we can split into two loops for the two different scenarios of J less than I and J greater than or equal to I. And with that, you'll still get the benefit of not having to evaluate that J less than I conditional end times. You've shifted it into the loop statement itself, so you've, there's no extra work involved. Except perhaps in the case of a tiny bit extra overhead associated with setting up two loops instead of one loop, but that's minor compared with the N conditional J less than I statements we removed. Next, let's talk about reduction operation. So a reduction operation is an operation where you take a big array of numbers and you calculate a single value from it. For example, the sum of the whole array, or the minimum or the maximum of the whole array. An operation where we have to go through, read every element of the array, and process that in some way to make a single output. In this case, I've illustrated finding the minimum of an array. So it loops over every value. Checks to see if the current value is less than the current minimum value that we've seen so far, and if it is less than the current minimum value, it updates the minimum value to be the current value. Well, what if I unroll the loop, like I showed earlier, instead of iterating over one element per loop, we could unroll the loop so that we do effectively 2 pieces of work per loop iteration. Or indeed you could unroll the loop by a factor of 4 or 8, etc. Now we keep track of two temporary minimum values instead of one minimum value like we did before. We've effectively split the array in two into odd and even elements in this particular example. And then we'll calculate the minimum of the even elements and the minimum of the odd elements, and then compare at the end to work out what the absolute minimum was over the whole array. But on initial inspection, this actually seems like a bad idea. In the previous optimisation, I just talked about not putting conditionals inside loops, if you don't have to. And now I'm talking about putting multiple conditionals inside the loop, which don't really have to be there. And indeed I haven't benchmarked this one, but I wouldn't be surprised if this so-called optimisation actually runs slower in this case. Most directly, this would be interpreted as serial code, it's just a serial loop where we go through one element at a time. However, it is now written in a way which could be parallellyzed. We've split the array into chunks, and each chunk can be processed in parallel with a final consolidation of the values at the end. Now whether or not the compiler and or the CPU hardware picks up on the fact that this can be parallellyzed is another matter, hopefully it would. But if you're not going to just hope the compiler saves you, you can also parallellyze it yourself using both SIMD instructions as well as MIMD through threading. In the code before, we kept track of two separate minimums for odd and even elements, and then found the minimum of the minimums at the end to consolidate the result. That type of approach is compatible with SIMD, although you'd probably handle it in blocks of 4 or 8 or 16 depending on whether you're working with SSE, AVX or AVX 512 instructions respectively. But let's say we're using AVX and we can handle it in blocks of 8. We can unroll that loop by a factor of 8. Make use of the simdi vectorized min instructions, then find the minimum of those eight minimums at the end. Then on top of that you could split the whole array into larger chunks and send those off to be processed in a MIMD fashion by like threads. Blocks of 8 adjacent memory elements are processed via SIMD in those chunks, and then the array as a whole is split into bigger continuous chunks and processed by threads or nodes. OK, and the final optimisation I'll discuss, which is by absolutely no means the least important, is employing memory access patterns that efficiently exploit cache. And then those same memory access patterns are also often amenable to SIMD as well. Looking here, we've got a 2D matrix, A, and we want to find the total sum of all elements of that 2D array, so pretty straightforward, we just iterate over the I dimension and the J dimension, reading in the values of A and then adding them to our running total sum total. There are two common ways in which 2D arrays are typically laid out in memory. There's the so-called C format, row major order, where the last index increments the fastest. So in this case that means J is changing as we move from one memory element to the next in the array. And then there's what's often known as Fortran format or column major format, where the first index increments the fastest. In this case, it would mean that I is changing as we move from one memory element to the adjacent memory element in the array. These are two alternate ways of laying out multi-dimensional arrays with important consequences for how you should access memory in that array from a cache point of view and from a SIMD point of view. Because remember, we want to access memory with spatial and temporal locality. We want to process nearby memory addresses at nearby points in time. And main memory will be read in via cache lines, which is 64 bytes at a time for an X86. Which means if we load in a single integer from an array, from RAM, the elements in nearby memory addresses will also be loaded into cache. We wanna access them while they're in cache, so that we don't have to go back and pay for another memory access later. As the loop is currently written, the outer loop, the one that changes the slowest, is I, and the inner loop, the one that changes the fastest, is J. And that also lines up with how the memory is laid out when we're working with C format, the row major format. Each iteration is accessing the adjacent memory address to the last iteration. We're accessing the memory with spatial and temporal locality. Nearby memory addresses are accessed at nearby points in time. Which means we minimise the number of requests we have to make to main memory and maximise our usage of cache, and accessing the memory in this way also opens up the possibility of employing SIMD instructions because we are sequentially accessing adjacent memory addresses, which means if we please, we could process them in SIMD blocks of let's say 4 in this example. But what happens now if we flip the inner and outer loop orders? Instead of I being the outer loop and J being the inner loop, what now if J becomes the outer loop and I the inner loop? Well now we're accessing the memory not sequentially, but rather in this interlaced pattern where each successive iteration does not access an adjacent memory address. As we iterate through, we're accessing memory like this. In this simplified example, because I've illustrated it as a simple 4x4 matrix, You'd actually probably be fine in this case, because the whole matrix fits in a single cache line, but realistically, Let's assume the dimensions of the array NX and NY are numbers that are much larger than 4. I've just illustrated it as 4 by 4 for graphical convenience. Pretend we're working with an array which is much, much larger. If the array is of even a modest size, every time we move to the next iteration, we have to load in a whole new cache line, and then we'll likely only be using a single float 32 from that cache line, and then the other 60 bytes, Just end up discarded, they're wasted memory access for a large array size on my computer, there was a factor of 8 speed difference between accessing sequentially versus accessing non-sequentially. And it'd probably even be more than that if the loop wasn't so tight. That is, there's hardly any work in the actual loop, so the loop maintenance, the loop counter, loop conditional statement itself would still represent a significant portion of the total, the total loop computations. When I ran this, I was a little bit suspicious of that factor of 8 because the CPU supports SIMD instructions that process blocks of 8 float 32s at a time. So perhaps the compiler had just vectorized my code for me and given me a boost with SIMD instructions, and that's where the 8 by improvement came from. So I hand vectorized it using AVX intrinsics, so that's why I didn't really rely on the compiler to vectorize it for me and use SIMD instructions. I manually made it do SIMD instructions. And that yielded an extra factor of 2 in performance, for a total of a 16 times speed up. And when you hand vectorize it like that, you're also naturally unrolling the loop as well. So there's also less loop overhead because we're only doing 1/8 of the iterations. So extra 2X speed up could be partially due to my hand vectorizing being more effective than the compiler's automatic vectorizing. Or it could be the unrolling of the loop by a factor of 8, in reality it's probably gonna be both, but in the end, we end up with a 16 times speed up. Which is certainly not to be sneezed at. And 16 times lines up essentially spot on with what you would expect from the cache speed up. Instead of only using 4 out of 64 bytes from our cache line. i.e., 1/16 of our cache line. We're now using all 64 bytes of the cache line, meaning we go to RAM 16 times less often. As a side note here, this code does work, but it is somewhat reckless, use of memory pointers and lack of checks. Um, so it's assuming NY is a multiple of 8, and it's assuming the memory addresses of the matrices are all aligned appropriately to be compatible with AVX intrinsic functions. We won't get into AVX intrinsics here. The point I'm really trying to get home here is not so much about the AVX intrinsics. The point is really just to highlight that accessing your memory with spatial and temporal locality maximises efficient use of cache, minimises the memory bandwidth required of main memory RAM, and also leaves open opportunities for employing SIMD instructions for further speed ups. In the next part of the lecture, we'll be looking at profiling your code, so it's all well and good to optimise your code, but if you want that sweet, sweet satisfaction of seeing how much faster your changes have made your code, you'll need a detailed and reliable means of characterising its performance. So how long did it take, how long did certain sections take, how long did they take under certain scenarios, etc. etc. The ability to get a detailed picture of how the runtime of your code breaks down by sections and routines will also guide your focus towards which parts of your code you should be devoting your time to optimising. Let's say we've got a section of code like so. It's all well and good to optimise this tiny loop, which is only 256 long. But even making that tiny loop infinitely fast isn't going to have any meaningful effect, because almost your entire run time is inside this major function here. You need to prioritise optimising the sections of code that have the greatest potential to improve your runtime. Don't devote your time, at least initially, to implementing all those neat tricks you've learnt on trivial code sections that only occupy 1% of your runtime. It's not where your skills are needed, at least initially. But of course in order to do that, you'll first need to profile your code to work out what sections are dominating your runtime, and hence what sections need to be focused on. This could be broken down in terms of routines or lines of codes or sections of lines of code, whatever it is, you need some mechanism to know what to focus on and to know whether the changes you've made made the situation better or worse and by how much. You need a heat map for your code, so that you can identify the hotspots. And then once identified, you can hand tune those hotspots in an attempt to cool them down, that is to say, speed them up. So perhaps this solving climate change routine here is a bit too hard. Perhaps we could get away with just replacing it with something easier. Maybe that'll be sufficient. Or if that's too intense, perhaps try to replace it with a task that's significantly easier. With that, let's look at code instrumentation. So just like instrumentation you'd use in a lab or some other context to measure something, we'll be using bits of code inserted into our code to measure its performance. So these can be like little stopwatch-like pieces of code, you manually add yourself, like in this code fragment, I'm using one of the standard C++ timers. I log the start time, I run the routine, then I log the stop time, and if the timer is accurate and precise enough, the difference between the two log times tells me the run time of that routine. But you do have to be careful because often timers will have a resolution. That might only be on the scale of milliseconds, and that resolution could be operating system and or compiler dependent. So just make sure that the timer you're using has enough precision and accuracy to measure what you want to measure. There's no point trying to measure a routine that runs in 1 microsecond using a timer that only measures time steps of 10 milliseconds. Your development environment or compiler will also typically have profiler tools built into them which let you analyse your performance. This is a screenshot from Microsoft Visual Studio, but we'll look at another example, Grof, that comes with the GCC compiler. But regardless of the method you use, you have to keep in mind that the profiling login code that you add, it also takes time to run. So it modifies your code and hence modifies your runtime. There's overhead associated with it, and the quicker the sections of the code you're trying to characterise, the more significant that overhead could be. Rather than using that sort of stopwatch type approach, sampling is a different approach. It's a statistical profiler that rather than inserting timers into your code, it regularly interrupts your code and sees what section it's currently in. And with that it builds up a picture of how time is being spent in each section. You can imagine it like this, if you wanted to work out what percentage of the Earth's surface each country and ocean took up, You could go through and measure the borders, integrate it and work out the areas, but an alternative approach would be to just spin the globe and pick places at random, and then over time you build up that same information. The upside of a statistical approach where you just routinely interrupt your code to sample where it is, is that it's statistical, it's not deterministic. The upside is that there's minimal overhead. Once we've got our profiling tools in place and we can characterise the performance of our code, we can now look at optimising the most important sections and getting a sense of how much improvement we could expect. Which brings us to Amel's law, which states, I'm paraphrasing, the maximum possible theoretical speed up is limited by the portion of your code you can't optimise or throw more resources at. Let's say we know our code consists of a portion that's cereal only. It can't possibly be paralysed, and that takes up 80% of our runtime. And then the remaining 20% of our runtime is a parallelizable section. It parallellyzes perfectly, let's say. Well, in that case, even if we assume that we can throw the entire computational power of the planet at that problem, the best improvement we could possibly get would be to take that 20% parallel section down to 0%, meaning our runtime would improve from 1 to 0.8, so 20% improvement. It doesn't necessarily have to be serial only versus parallelizable sections, it's really just about what portions of your code can be optimised and what portion cannot. The max speed up you can expect is constrained by that section that cannot be optimised for whatever reason. Looking at it here from the perspective of serial portion versus parallel portion. If 50% of your code is serial only and the other 50% is perfectly parallelizable, then the max speed up is a factor of 2. Along the X axis there, if we threw an infinite number of processes at the parallel section, we could bring its runtime to 0, and in doing so, we'll have halved the run time. If 90% of the code can be perfectly paralysed, then we could expect a 10 times speed up, dropping the runtime potentially from 100% to 10%. Now you might say, Joel. Isn't that kind of obvious? Isn't that so-called law effectively just saying that you can't optimise your code beyond the point where it takes zero time to run? Why does this Amdale guy get to state the obvious and he gets a law named after him. Meanwhile, you've got other scientists out there discovering non-intuitive laws that lead to complete overhauls of how we understand the universe. And then they've still gotta share their law's name with some other guy. They don't even get the whole order themselves. Well, to your question, I say. You know what? Life's not fair. Life's not fair, folks. I'm sorry you had to learn that from your COSC 3500 lecturer. Someone probably should have explained that to you before you got to me. But I'm telling you now, life's not fair. Um, I don't know why Amel got to have that law named after him. I don't make the laws about who gets to have a law named after them. I just have to teach you guys those laws. OK, that's Joel's law. Joel's law is Joel doesn't get to name the laws. Well, except for that law actually, I did name that one, but anyway, I'm getting sidetracked here, so let's move on. The profiling tool we'll be looking at here as an example is a common one. It comes with a GCC compiler and you'll be looking at it in more detail in the tutorials. It's called GProf and it supports both a code instrumentation approach and a sampling approach. Do you use GProf? You need to compile your code in GCC using the PG flag. And then you run the programme. Then you run the GProf utility to analyse the profile log your programme created. Here's an example, we're compiling some test.c file using GCC and we've specified the GProf flag. We've turned off optimisations because there's certain types of optimisations that can mess with the profiler. You can be a bit more targeted with regards to what optimisations you turn off rather than just turning off all optimisations with ON0. You can turn off just the no PIE and the FO built-in optimisations, I think that should still work just without those two. And with our programme compiled, we can now run our executable prog. And after it's done, we can call GProf on Prog. Prog is the programme we want to analyse. GM.out is a binary file full of profiling information that was generated when we ran prog because we had compiled it earlier using the PG flag. For Grof, and then we'll output the binary file to a human readable text file. Inside there we can see the so-called flat profile output, it's a basic table summary of our profiling information. We've got a column with the name of our functions. The programme has 3 functions in it. And then each of those 3 functions took up a certain percentage of the total runtime. This column has a cumulative sum of the runtime of each section in seconds, so the last 7.3 seconds is the total runtime. The next column is effectively the same as the percentage time column, except it's listed in seconds rather than as a percentage. 5.14 seconds in the intersect routine, 1.9 seconds in the shade routine, 0.27 seconds in the calc tile routine. Next column tells us how many times each of these functions were called. The next column tells you the runtime per function call. So in those previous two columns we had the total time inside each function and the number of times that function was called. So if you divide the total time by the number of calls, you get the amount of time each call took. That's the column we're looking at here. This column tells us the average time per call in this function and its descendants. So in this case, it looks like calc tile is, Kind of like a main function type call, it gets called relatively few times, only 100, whereas intersect and shade are called millions of times, and although not a lot of time is spent directly inside the calct function itself, there's a lot of time spent in the descendants of the calct. To get a more detailed look, instead of looking at the flat profile summary, we can look at the call graph profile. It's a table which gives us a breakdown by function and the functions it was called by and the functions that it calls. It's building up a summary of the scenarios we see on that call graph illustrated on the right. We've got functions that call other functions, we've got functions that are called by other functions, we've got potentially recursive calls. So let's take a look at that breakdown. First, index one, i.e. scenario one. The scenario where the main function calls the calctile function, the non-indented one is the primary function and the indented one is the one it calls. Scenario 2, index 2, the calctile function is called by main, that's above calctile but indented, and calct calls shade. Scenario 3 is an example of a recursive call. We've got the function shade, which amongst other functions is called by itself and calls itself. Shade is called from inside shade and it's also called from calctile. That's how it gets into the recursive call in the first place. It enters via calc tile and then there's recursive calls of shade calling itself after that. And shade calls itself and it calls intersect. Looking across in the call tally, we've got 4 million non-recursive calls plus 5.5 million or so recursive calls where shade calls shade. Over in this column we've got the percentage of time spent executing including any children. So you can see the main function includes 100% of the runtime in itself or its descendant calls, and intersect at the end of the call graph contains 70.2. Next column we've got the time in seconds attributed to itself. So the main function doesn't really do anything other than call other routines, so it has none of its own runtime. Calct has 0.27 seconds of its own runtime. Looking across at the next column, children, we've got the time in seconds spent in the children of the functions. Looking at the Maine again, we spend the whole run time in the Children of Maine because that's where all the routines stem from in this programme. The Children of Maine consist of the full 7.3 seconds of runtime. Here we can see that the amount of time spent in the Children of Caltal is equal to the total run time minus the time spent inside Caltal. That is main runs in zero time because it doesn't have any of its own code in this case. We spend 0.27 seconds in calct, which in turn calls shade, etc. where the rest of the 7.03 seconds of run time is spent. This column summarises the number of times the routine was called and how those number of calls were associated with parents and children. There's fractions in there like 100 out of 100 times Calt was called, it was called by Ma. Alright, so we've profiled our code, we've identified what portions of the hotspots, now we want to optimise away those hotspots. Alright, we want to optimise our code, so. Ask yourself, can I do this in a better way? It's often easy to get obsessed with the nitty gritty details of optimising your code line by line down at the sort of micro level, shaving off instructions, optimising your memory access, all that's very important and that's a big part of this course. But it's also worth taking a step back and seeing whether the overall approach you're taking is the right one. You can spend a lot of time making an incredibly efficient, lean implementation of a terrible algorithm. Whereas switching to an entirely new approach could save you even more than streamlining your code itself. So don't forget the bigger picture. So keep an eye out for superior methods, you know, research potentially better algorithms. You don't have to reinvent the wheel every time, so look for numerical libraries that can help you out as well. And I put a bit of a caveat on that last point about leveraging existing numerical libraries. Obviously in the real world it's fine to use existing libraries, but in terms of an undergrad course where you're trying to demonstrate your skills, You can't just choose a project that does something like a Fourier transform, and then just call the Fourier transform from a library. Um, you can use some libraries in the course, but you don't wanna rely on them so heavily as to make the code you wrote trivial and not worthy of any marks, right? However, as a general principle, use existing libraries where you can, particularly for common mathematical operations that a lot of people use, because those libraries are probably already pretty good. Things like Boost, MKL, FFTW, etc. etc. Then the next steps move on to actually making the coat itself fast and lean. Look to remove overhead. We've discussed some of these earlier, remove code that doesn't need to be there, things like globally defined variables that are really just local variables, tests within loops were already discussed, type conversion, for example, converting unnecessarily between integers and floats, or between different types of ints or different types of floats. Those aren't particularly expensive operations, they're comparable to like additions or multiplications, those kind of sort of simple operations, but they're not free either, so don't, don't be haphazard with it. As a side note, it can also create rounding and precision issues, so you should be mindful of those conversions anyways. Memory read and writes We already discussed quite a bit. But it's a big one, don't read or write memory any more than you absolutely have to, and whenever possible, employ spatial and temporal locality when you do read and write from memory. Simplify your equations and logic, that's another way of minimising instructions and potentially memory access as well by simplifying the form of your calculation. Streamline your calls to subroutines by employing things like inlining, particularly if the subroutine is very small, and hence the overhead of the routine itself could be a significant portion of the total runtime of that subroutine. Another important principle is to avoid doing anything that unnecessarily limits the flexibility of the compiler. You want the compiler to be able to pull off any tricks that it has in its book, but it needs to know from you what it's allowed to do and what it's not allowed to do. And if you write your code in the wrong way, it might limit what's possible unnecessarily. Things like putting conditionals inside a loop that maybe don't need to be there. That could make the compiler think that maybe it can't parallellyze iterations of the loop at the instruction level or the data level. Those conditionals inside loops might make the compiler think it can't start on the next iteration of the loop before the previous one is finished, even though it actually could as an example. Similarly, limit interdependence. I've said between variables here, but just avoid unnecessary interdependence between things in your code in general. Again, those dependencies constrain things like instruction level and data level parallelism. The CPU could potentially work on two things in parallel, but the way you've written it might mean that there's a dependency which implies to the CPU or the compiler that it can't, even though it really could. You've just wrote it in a bad way. Another one is ambiguous use of pointers, so depending on your code, it might not be possible for the compiler to have much certainty about what exactly your pointer is going to be pointing to. It might not be able to tell whether two pointers are potentially pointing to the same thing, or it might not be able to tell whether the contents of the array that this points to is changing potentially within this loop, or maybe it's a constant within this loop. It doesn't know, so you gotta be careful with your, with your pointers. Overall the goal here is just to give hints to the compiler as to what the true scenario is and what the actual limits are on what it can assume about the data and the instructions. Something to be careful of, particularly when you've got compiler optimisations turned on with your 01, 02, 03, etc. flags. Is that the compiler is also trying to optimise your code, so you're trying to optimise the code, but the compiler's always trying to optimise your code as well. So it's possible that that new trick that you just thought of to improve your code, the compiler may have already thought of that last time you compiled it. So don't be surprised if you make a change to your code, which you know theoretically should be better. And the runtime ends up being basically identical. It could be that the compiler already fixed up your poorly written code for you last time, so it noticed the problem before you did. It already noticed, for example, that that bit of code you wrote doesn't do anything, and it already removed it. Before you manually removed it from your code. For example, here's a simple loop where I sum up every element of the array A, and then print out the total sum at the end to the console. I have compiler opttimisations turned on, and when I run that code and profile it, it finds that it runs in a measurable amount of time. Doesn't matter what it is, but it's just something, it's measurable, it's not zero. Then I comment out my printer console line and I run it again. But now the run time becomes 0. The compiler has noticed that I never use the result total. And it just optimised away that entire loop, because that loop is now pointless, because nothing in that loop matters, totals never used, doesn't get printed out, doesn't get used for anything, loop doesn't matter, compiler just removes it entirely. So just be careful because while you're sitting there commenting out certain sections of code to characterise other sections of code, your compiler's watching the whole time, and it might decide to remove entire other sections of your code. That have now become pointless because of what you've commented out somewhere else. So remember, it's a team effort. The code you're writing is also being optimised by the compiler. It's trying to help you out, it doesn't know what's going on in your head, it just sees code with pointless sections in it. There's that additional step where the compiler gets hold of your code, and that means that the changes you make in raw source code are not directly reflected in a 1 to 1 mapping in the final machine code. Don't be surprised if the compiler outsmarts you a lot of the time. The compiler's just trying to help. I am out here for you.

SPEAKER 1
You don't know what it's like to be me out here for you. It is an up at dawn, pride swallowing siege that I will never fully tell you about, OK? Help me. Help me, Rod. Help me, help you.

SPEAKER 2
Help me. Help you. Help me help you.

SPEAKER 0
In a bit of a similar vein, Cash is also trying to help you, it's also your friend. And it's also trying to make your code fast. But when you're trying to profile your code, sometimes it might be too helpful, and that's on you. If you're constructing your benchmarks in a way which is too artificial and contrived, then you might inadvertently start taking advantage of cache in a way which you would never be able to do in proper usage of your code. What do I mean by that? For example, let's say I've written some function that processes an image. Doesn't matter what the routine is, it just takes a pointer to my image and it processes it. The image processing routine. Is relatively fast, so I run it end times in a loop to ostensibly improve the accuracy of the timing. It runs too fast for my timer to time one of them, so I run end of them. However, unlike in real usage of the function, in my benchmark, I'm just feeding it in the same image every time in that loop, which isn't how you'd normally use that image processing routine, right, normally it would be a new image every time. So the CPU case shows, ah I see. This image is being accessed all the time, I'm gonna put that in cache. That'll be much faster. I am so cool and thoughtful. Now when you profile your code, you see that this due process image routine is running ridiculously fast, suspiciously fast. Because in the realistic scenario, every image it processes would be different, it wouldn't be able to rely on that image already being in cache when the routine starts. This is not a realistic scenario or a test case. It's not an appropriate way to benchmark this particular routine. So instead, you'd have to make a big set of test images to feed into the routine, one for each of the N iterations, or at least enough images that you can be sure that they won't all fit in cache and cause incorrect benchmarking results. So overall the point here with cache or compiler flags or setting up little dummy test loops to characterise your code. Is to try to make the scenario as realistic as possible, because if you're not careful, you might create a scenario which is not a genuine benchmark of the actual performance. And then finally, Make sure your code actually works when you're benchmarking it. Again, so that the benchmarking results you get are actually meaningful. It's very easy to make code run fast, that doesn't do anything, or doesn't work properly. So it's possible to sit there optimising your code, thinking you're making it really fast, and then when you go back to check the results at the end, you realise that somewhere along the way, during your optimisation tweaks, you actually broke the code. OK, and that's it, so in that lecture. It was mostly looking at different types of optimisations that you can do manually, some of those are already often done internally by the compiler. And we looked at profiling your code, looked at a specific case of how you can use GProf, but there's many different types of profilers out there that you can that you can use. And Probably one of the main points there about the profiling was to profile your code in as realistic a scenario as possible. Because when you start pulling individual chunks out of your code and trying to profile them separately, you can create scenarios which are not realistic and aren't really valid characterizations of your code.
